---
title: Simone De Beauvoir - a critique of historical Western philosophy
original-publication: 2018-04-06
date: 2020-07-14
tags: philosophy gender-theory gender-contemporary
author: tristan
episode: 1

---

Simone De Beauvoir challenged the ways that primarily-male Western philosophers
characterized gender, specifically their restrictive definitions of femininity.

As we saw in the posts on [the Western history of gender][gender-history],
philosophers largely viewed women as flawed humans, but classified men as
practically divine and supremely logical beings operating beyond their mortal
coils. Beauvoir criticized the basis for these theories: 

> Man vainly forgets that his anatomy also includes hormones and testicles. He
> grasps his body as a direct and normal link with the world that he believes
> he apprehends in all objectivity, whereas he considers woman's body an
> obstacle, a prison, burdened by everything that particularizes
> it.[^the-second-sex]
>
> *(De Beauvoir, The second sex, pp2014)*

# The receipts

Beauvoir supports her claims by referencing the works of classical
philosophers, demonstrating the ways that masculine superiority has impacted
large schools of thought:

* [Aristotle][aristotle-post], a famous philosopher who continues to have
  influence in modern philosophy, stated that "the female is female by virtue
  of a certain lack of qualities, \[...\] we should regard women's nature as
  suffering from natural defectiveness."[^the-second-sex]
  *(De Beauvoir, The second sex, pp2014)*
* [Saint Thomas][thomas-post], who influenced the Catholic church, declared
  that women were an "incomplete man," and an "incidental"
  being.[^the-second-sex] *(De Beauvoir, The second sex, pp2014)*
* Many interpretations of [Genesis II][genesis-post], where the creation of Eve
  from Adam’s redundant and extraneous rib-bone is taken to symbolize reliance
  and submission.

Beauvoir concludes that ancient philosophers defined men as the default,
and women as merely an object in relation to men; not as an individual.

> Humanity is male, and man defines woman, not in herself, but in relation to
> himself; she is not considered an autonomous being.[^the-second-sex]
>
> *(De Beauvoir, The second sex, pp2014)*

## What is femininity?

Recognizing that femininity has been historically defined as _distinctly not
masculine_ is important to understanding our modern ideas of femininity,
and gender in general, as an identifying trait.

If our definition for a gender is the lack of another identifier, we run into
issues of categorization.

- What does it mean to be a woman if womanhood is simply not-manhood?
- What about men who do not conform to the [hegemonic][webster-hegemony] ideas
  of masculinity?
- What does it mean to identify as a man, and subsequently as a non-man?

These historical ideas about gender don’t help us to understand people’s
experiences.

---

[gender-history]: /projects/gender-history.html
    "Gender history project"

[aristotle-post]: {% post_url 2020-07-11-aristotle %}
    "Aristotle's One Sex Theory"

[thomas-post]: {% post_url 2020-07-12-st-augestine %}
    "St. Augestine and head coverings"

[genesis-post]: {% post_url 2020-07-11-genesis %}
    "Genesis: Two make one"

[webster-hegemony]: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/hegemony
    "Merriam-Webster: Hegemony"

[^the-second-sex]: De Beauvoir, Simone. The Second Sex. Random House, 2014.
