---
title: Michel Foucault – who decides the categories?
description: When discussing the power of characterization and categorization,
    Michel Foucault is the contemporary authority on the subject.
excerpt: When discussing the power of characterization and categorization,
    Michel Foucault is the contemporary authority on the subject.
date: 2020-11-29
tags: philosophy gender-theory gender-contemporary
author: tristan
episode: 4

---

*This post was originally published on Apr 6th, 2018 as part of a larger work
titled ["Gender: Flip the script"][flip-the-script-post]*

> "And we're such language-based creatures that to some extent we cannot know
> what we cannot name. And so we assume it isn't real."
> 
> ~ John Green, Turtles All the Way Down

There's been many examples over the decades of people resisting the changing
nature of words, or the introduction of new ones. Recently, this is
particularly focussed on gender and sexuality. Why do we continue to
support the idea of a gender binary in Western society?

To help us answer this, we turn to [Michel Foucault][wiki-foucault]; a
French philosopher best known for his insights into the relationship between
power, [characterization][defn-characterization], and
[categorization][defn-categorization]. Foucault is a
contemporary authority on language and how power manifests itself in our
interactions. His work has relevance to gender and sexuality as 
examples of a classification system -- one that influences
[how we act][butler-post] and how we [expect others to act][kessler-post] in
Western society. 

[wiki-foucault]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Michel_Foucault
[defn-characterization]: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/characterization
[defn-categorization]: https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/categorization


## Categorization as communication

Starting with the connection between categorization and language: in order to
communicate ideas, we need to be able to classify and categorize the things we
want to communicate (i.e ideas, objects, and people). This is because the words
we use to communicate (adjectives, verbs, nouns, etc) are all categories and
classifications.

For example:
- "Big" is a word we use to classify/categorize things that are similar in size.
- "Running" is a word we use to classify/categorize a specific type of motion.
- "Person" is a word we often use to classify/categorize a subject that is
  human (although other definitions exist).

Without categorization, no mechanism of classification or description would be
present, which would prevent us from being able to describe anything, and
without the ability to describe things, we loose the ability to communicate,
even possibly to think.[^multiplicity]

[^multiplicity]: Foucault uses a thought experiment of a language
    with too many or too little categories to make the point that such a
    language would be useless, hypothesizing that such a language
    "does not distribute the multiplicity of existing things into any of the
    categories that make it possible for us to name, speak, and think."
    *(Foucault, The order of things: an archaeology of the human sciences, XIX)*

## Knowledge production and power

With the notion that categorization is a necessary part of
communication, we can dig a bit deeper into how a society decides on the
definitions.  The acts of structuring, organizing, and categorizing experiences
are forms of knowledge production; which makes them acts of power.

Knowledge production is an act of power in many ways, but some obvious ways
that knowledge is connected to power include:
- who gets to speak and be listened to (what knowledge is produced)
- which ideas get funding (what knowledge gets capitalistic support)
- what actions do we take based on an idea (what we do is based on what
  knowledge is produced)

We can see the impact of this in a couple ways, one being the classification of
"personhood." Since we give the subjects classified as persons specific
rights/privledges, inclusivity in this category impacts people's lives
directly. Since the impact of inclusion/exclusion in any category or
characterization has complex ramifications, even seemingly-inconsiquential
categories are important.

Another example of this impact is [knowledge produced in the medical
field][guardian-bias]. Since the field is mostly comprised of people with
sexually male physiology, the biology of people with other physiologies has not
been extensively studied, and issues affecting other people (including the side
effects of medication) are often downplayed.

> ["Medicine defines the female and male bodies as distinct but not equal;
> analyses of medical texts throughout history reveals the male body to be
> constructed as superior and the template against which bodies are judged.
> Any aspect of the female body that differs from the male or that cannot be
> given a male comparative (exemplified by the uterus) is viewed as evidence of
> deviation or “fault”."][original-paper]

[guardian-bias]: https://www.theguardian.com/lifeandstyle/2019/nov/13/the-female-problem-male-bias-in-medical-trials
[original-paper]: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0959353518815704 
    '"Do mad people get endo or does endo make you mad?": Clinicians’ discursive constructions of Medicine and women with endometriosis'

## The Western context

Moving back to categorization, remember:
- Categorization is important as a method of describing differences and
  communicating concepts.
- There is a relationship between power and the categorizations used in a
  society.
- Since language is a system of categorization and classification, gender is
  also within this system of categorization, albiet one of the [most important
  categorizations in Western society][kessler-post].

The formation of the two gender categories in the [Western idea of
gender][gender-history] and their continual effects on social relations are an
illustration of the relationship between gender categorization and the power
structures present in Western society.

Historically, Western society recognizes two genders, which are rationalized
using naturalistic arguments[^define-naturalism]. These arguments rely on the
idea that a trait is inherent to all people regardless of their culture or
society (i.e. the trait is inherent to human biology).

The factors and power dynamics that lead Western society to settle on only two
genders, and the ways naturalistic arguments were constructed to support this
idea, are [easy to find in our historical literature][gender-history]. 

[^define-naturalism]: Naturalism in this case is referring to metaphysical
    naturalism, which is the argument that a trait ["related to consciousness and
    the mind are reducible to, or supervene upon, nature."][wiki-naturalism]

The specific theory that's used to justify a gender dichotomy in Western
society is usually reffered to as [bio-determanism][bio-determinism-wiki]. It
uses appeals to nature (the equivalence of naturalality with good-ness)[^aside]
and sexual dimorphism (the condition where the two sexes of a species exhibit
different characteristics) to justify the Western gender binary. However,
we have records of other societies that use more than two
categories[^other-genders], providing a counter-example to any naturalistic
arguments.[^counter-example]

[wiki-naturalism]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Naturalism_(philosophy)
[bio-determinism-wiki]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Biological_determinism

[^other-genders]: Some examples include: [hijras in South Asia][wiki-hijra], 
    [two-spirit people in Native American cultures][wiki-two-spirit], the 
    [femminielli of Naples][wiki-femminiello], and 
    [kathoey in Thailand][wiki-kathoey]. 

[wiki-two-spirit]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Two-spirit
[wiki-hijra]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Hijra_(South_Asia)
[wiki-femminiello]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Femminiello
[wiki-kathoey]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Kathoey

[^counter-example]: Since there exists at least one society that does not have
    only two genders, we know that this isn't a trait that is solely
    biological.

[^aside]: As an aside, [appeals to nature][wiki-appeal-to-nature] are generally
    considered to be a fallacy. 

[wiki-appeal-to-nature]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Appeal_to_nature

The way gender categories are formed in different societies is complicated and
unfortunately not well understood, but we can conclude that gender isn't solely 
biological. Despite [growing research][facebook-gender] on and
[support][time-gender] for intersex, trans, and gender queer people who do not
fit into these categories, Western society continues to frame its populations
in terms of two genders.

[facebook-gender]: https://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/facebook/10930654/Facebooks-71-gender-options-come-to-UK-users.html
[time-gender]: http://time.com/4703058/time-cover-story-beyond-he-or-she/

## Why do we continue to categorize people using a gender binary?

The story of Western gender constructs is largely informed by the power
dynamics of society. The individuals in positions of authority influence the
categorizations we use, whether they be church officials like [St Thomas
Aquinas][thomas-post], educators and philosophers like
[Aristotle][aristotle-post], or even the people around us who may relay our
actions to an authority figure or someone whom we respect.

However, it’s not just influential leaders and thinkers who enforce gender; we
all enforce, attribute, and assume each other’s gender. While these effects may
not be equivalent to those with structural power, we are all implicated in
perpetuating and normalizing Western ideas of gender.

*Thank you to Sam Yoon, [Eli Lee][eli-website], and [Brigitte
Dreger][brigitte-website] for providing early feedback.*

[eli-website]: https://www.elijahlee.ca/
[brigitte-website]: https://brigitte-dreger.medium.com/

---
## More reading

Foucault, Michel. *The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences.*
1st American ed.-, Pantheon Books, 1970.

Foucault, Michel, and Robert Hurley. *The History of Sexuality.* London: Allen
Lane, 1979. Print. 

---

[gender-history]: /projects/gender-history.html
    "Gender history project"

[aristotle-post]: {% post_url 2020-07-11-aristotle %}
    "Aristotle's One Sex Theory"

[thomas-post]: {% post_url 2020-07-12-st-augestine %}
    "St. Augestine and head coverings"

[genesis-post]: {% post_url 2020-07-11-genesis %}
    "Genesis: Two make one"

[kessler-post]: {% post_url 2020-07-14-kessler-mckenna %}
    "Kessler and McKenna: the subjective categorization of gender"

[butler-post]: {% post_url 2020-08-13-judith-butler %}
    "Judith Butler – Gender as a performance"

[flip-the-script-post]: {% post_url 2018-04-06-gender-as-a-performance %}
    "Gender: Flip the script"

[^the-second-sex]: De Beauvoir, Simone. The Second Sex. Random House, 2014.

[^gender]: Kessler, Suzanne J., and Wendy McKenna. Gender: An Ethnomethodological Approach. University of Chicago Press, 1985.

[^gender-trouble]: Butler, Judith. Gender Trouble: Subjects of Sex/Gender/Desire.

[^sister-outsider]: Lorde, Audre. Sister Outsider: Essays and Speeches.  Crossing Press, c2007.

[wiki-naturalism]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Naturalism_(philosophy)

[wiki-panopticon]: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Panopticon#Criticism_and_use_as_metaphor


